[RHDEVDOCS-7613] Release notes for Pipelines 1.23.0 (#111879)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/op-release-notes-1-23-0.adoc

// This module is included in the following assemblies:
// * release_notes/op-release-notes-1-23.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: REFERENCE
[id="op-release-notes-1-23-0_{context}"]
= Release notes for {pipelines-title} 1.23

With this update, {pipelines-title} General Availability (GA) 1.23 is available on {OCP} <TODO> and later supported versions.

For more information about supported {OCP} versions, see link:https://access.redhat.com/support/policy/updates/openshift#dates[Life Cycle Dates].

[id="new-features-1-23-0_{context}"]
== New features and enhancements

In addition to fixes and stability improvements, these sections highlight what is new in {pipelines-shortname} 1.23:

.{pac}

//SRVKP-7197
Configurable prefix for GitOps commands prevents CI conflicts::

> With this update, {pac} supports a configurable prefix for GitOps commands to prevent execution conflicts when multiple CI systems, such as Prow, are active on the same repository. You can define a custom string that must precede standard commands, for example, `/pac-retest` instead of `/retest`, ensuring the controller only triggers for its designated instructions. This feature eliminates redundant builds and command collisions, helping provide a seamless experience for teams running hybrid CI environments.

Reviewer: Can we change the prefix example with `/pac-retest` to `/pac retest`, without the hyphen. 
The configured prefix is followed by a "space" instead of a "hyphen" in the gitops comment implementation.

Author: Fixed. Thank you!

+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-11789[SRVKP-11789]

[id="pipelines-deprecated-features-1-23-0"]
== Deprecated features

.{pac}

//SRVKP-11931
The pipelinerun_status field in the Repository CR is deprecated::
The `pipelinerun_status` field in the `Repository` custom resource (CR), which tracks pipeline run status, was deprecated in {pipelines-shortname} 1.22 and will be removed in a future release. This field is not scalable and has caused issues. Migrate away from this field to avoid disruption when it is removed.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-11931[SRVKP-11931]

.CLI

//SRVKP-11950

> Tekton Hub support in the tkn hub CLI is deprecated::

Reviewer 2: The Hub changes looks good.
Thanks @ochromy

[id="op-release-notes-1-23-0_{context}"]
= Release notes for {pipelines-title} 1.23

{pipelines-title} General Availability (GA) 1.23 is available on {OCP} <TODO> and later supported versions.

For more information about supported {OCP} versions, see link:https://access.redhat.com/support/policy/updates/openshift#dates[Life Cycle Dates].

[id="new-features-1-23-0_{context}"]
== New features and enhancements

In addition to fixes and stability improvements, these sections highlight what is new in {pipelines-shortname} 1.23:

.Operator

//SRVKP-10928
Self-healing for CA bundle config maps in user namespaces::
The {pipelines-shortname} Operator automatically detects and recreates missing CA bundle config maps (`config-trusted-cabundle` and `config-service-cabundle`) in user namespaces. Previously, if these config maps were deleted after initial reconciliation, the Operator would not recreate them because it only checked the namespace label. The Operator verifies that both config maps exist and triggers re-reconciliation if either is missing.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-10928[SRVKP-10928]

//SRVKP-9462
Central TLS configuration enabled by default::

> Central TLS configuration is enabled by default on {OCP}. The `enableCentralTLSConfig` field in `TektonConfig` changed from an opt-in `bool` to an opt-out `*bool`. Existing clusters automatically inherit the cluster APIServer TLS profile, including minimum TLS version and cipher suites, on the next reconcile after upgrade. Set `enableCentralTLSConfig: false` to opt out.

Reviewer 3: *bool etc, is a technical details, we just nee to mention that by default now openshidt pipelines is respecting  central tls consistency on openshift wich means th osp product  inherit the cluster APIServer TLS profile, including minimum TLS version and cipher suites, on the next reconcile after upgrade. Set `enableCentralTLSConfig: false` to opt out. Any tls service on openshift pipeliens is getting its configuration from the api server tls profile,

Correct not Existting clusters inherit, it is about the product configuration

Author: Updated, thank you for the clarification.

> +

Reviewer 4: @ochromy This is the jira id for TLS epic
https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/SRVKP-9462
The current jira id is pointing to CLONE -  Upstream release notes for Operator

Author: Updated, thank you!

link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-9462[SRVKP-9462]

//SRVKP-9462
Centrally managed TLS for {pipelines-shortname} components::

> {pipelines-shortname} components automatically inherit TLS configuration from the {OCP} cluster's APIServer TLS security profile when `enableCentralTLSConfig` is set in `TektonConfig`. This includes minimum TLS version, cipher suites, and curve preferences for the Operator webhooks, Pipelines webhook, Triggers webhook and core interceptors, {pac} webhook, Manual Approval Gate webhook, and console plugin nginx server. Changes to the cluster TLS profile are automatically propagated to components without operator restarts, enabling Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) readiness.

Reviewer 3: Please remove curve preferences, they are not propagated as for now, we need a followu work

Author: Removed, thank you.

+

> link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12425[SRVKP-12425]

Reviewer 4: Update jira id here as well for TLS 
https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/SRVKP-9462

//SRVKP-12425

> Metrics migrated from OpenCensus to OpenTelemetry::

Reviewer 5: @ochromy  for 'Metrics migrated from OpenCensus to OpenTelemetry', epic key is SRVKP-7899

Author: Updated, thank you!

+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12422[SRVKP-12422]

//SRVKP-12422
Specific TaskRun failure reasons::
TaskRun status reports more specific reasons such as `PodEvicted`, `InitContainerOOM`, `InitContainerFailed`, `StepOOM`, `StepFailed`, `SidecarOOM`, and `SidecarFailed`. Previously, pod-level task run failures were often reported with a generic `Failed` reason, requiring inspection of Pod details to understand common failure causes.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12422[SRVKP-12422]

//SRVKP-12422
Webhook TLS configuration::
The Tekton Pipelines webhook inherits centrally managed TLS settings such as minimum TLS version, cipher suites, and curve preferences. Previously, the webhook did not use the centralized `WEBHOOK_*` TLS configuration provided by the platform. As a result, webhook TLS configuration can follow the platform security profile.
+

> link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12422[SRVKP-12422]

Reviewer 4: @ochromy Need to update here as well.
https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/SRVKP-9462

Insecure OCI registry support::
{tekton-chains} supports connecting to insecure OCI registries. This allows signing and storing attestations in registries that do not have valid TLS certificates, such as development or testing environments.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12424[SRVKP-12424]

.{tekton-results}

//SRVKP-12423
Loki logging plugin configuration options::
Two new Loki-specific configuration options are available for the logging plugin: `LOGGING_PLUGIN_JSON_MAP` to define custom JSON field extraction mappings, and `LOGGING_PLUGIN_LINE_FORMAT` to define custom log line output formatting. This allows extraction of structured fields from Loki log entries, such as timestamps and pipeline run UIDs, and control over how log lines are displayed when queried through {tekton-results}.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12423[SRVKP-12423]

.Triggers

//SRVKP-12419
TLS security profile support for core interceptors::
Core interceptors honor the TLS security profile injected by the Tekton Operator through `TLS_MIN_VERSION`, `TLS_CIPHER_SUITES`, and `TLS_CURVE_PREFERENCES` environment variables for cluster-wide TLS policy enforcement on {OCP}.
+

> link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12419[SRVKP-12419]

Reviewer 4: @ochromy This is the jira id for core interceptors
https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/SRVKP-11953

.Operator

//SRVKP-10928
Self-healing for CA bundle config maps in user namespaces::
The {pipelines-shortname} Operator automatically detects and recreates missing CA bundle config maps (`config-trusted-cabundle` and `config-service-cabundle`) in user namespaces. Previously, if these config maps were deleted after initial reconciliation, the Operator would not recreate them because it only checked the namespace label. The Operator verifies that both config maps exist and triggers re-reconciliation if either is missing.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-10928[SRVKP-10928]

//SRVKP-12425
Central TLS configuration enabled by default::
Central TLS configuration is enabled by default on {OCP}. The `enableCentralTLSConfig` field in `TektonConfig` changed from an opt-in `bool` to an opt-out `*bool`. Existing clusters automatically inherit the cluster APIServer TLS profile, including minimum TLS version and cipher suites, on the next reconcile after upgrade. Set `enableCentralTLSConfig: false` to opt out.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12425[SRVKP-12425]

//SRVKP-12425
Centrally managed TLS for {pipelines-shortname} components::

> {pipelines-shortname} components automatically inherit TLS configuration from the {OCP} cluster's APIServer TLS security profile when `enableCentralTLSConfig` is set in `TektonConfig`. This includes minimum TLS version, cipher suites, and curve preferences for the Operator webhooks, Pipelines webhook, Triggers webhook and core interceptors, {pac} webhook, and console plugin nginx server. Changes to the cluster TLS profile are automatically propagated to components without operator restarts, enabling Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) readiness.

Reviewer 4: @ochromy Can you also include manual-approval-gate-webhook.

Author: Will do, @manthinasai. 
Just a clarification: should I include it as "manual-approval-gate-webhook", "manual-approval-gate webhook" or "Manual Approval Gate webhook" (just like the "Pipelines as Code webhook")?

Reviewer 4: @ochromy Manual Approval Gate webhook looks good.

+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12425[SRVKP-12425]

//SRVKP-12425
{tekton-results} API route uses passthrough TLS termination::
Before this update, the {tekton-results} API route did not use passthrough TLS termination. As a consequence, end-to-end encryption between clients and the Results API service was not enabled. With this update, the {tekton-results} API route uses passthrough TLS termination by default. As a result, end-to-end encryption is enabled for API communications.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12425[SRVKP-12425]

//SRVKP-12425
TektonInstallerSet deadlock resolved when resources have deletionTimestamp::
Before this update, a `TektonInstallerSet` could deadlock when attempting to reconcile resources that had a `deletionTimestamp` set. As a consequence, the reconciliation process could hang indefinitely. With this update, the reconciliation logic properly handles resources with `deletionTimestamp`. As a result, reconciliation completes successfully without deadlocking.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12425[SRVKP-12425]

.Pipelines

//SRVKP-7717

> Termination messages are compressed to prevent truncation and missing results::

Reviewer 6: This feature is not part of the Tekton Pipeline 1.12 release line that OSP 1.23 is based on.

Author: Removed.

Central TLS configuration is enabled by default on {OCP}. The `enableCentralTLSConfig` field in `TektonConfig` changed from an opt-in `bool` to an opt-out `*bool`. Existing clusters automatically inherit the cluster APIServer TLS profile, including minimum TLS version and cipher suites, on the next reconcile after upgrade. Set `enableCentralTLSConfig: false` to opt out.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12425[SRVKP-12425]

//SRVKP-12425
Centrally managed TLS for {pipelines-shortname} components::
{pipelines-shortname} components automatically inherit TLS configuration from the {OCP} cluster's APIServer TLS security profile when `enableCentralTLSConfig` is set in `TektonConfig`. This includes minimum TLS version, cipher suites, and curve preferences for the Operator webhooks, Pipelines webhook, Triggers webhook and core interceptors, {pac} webhook, and console plugin nginx server. Changes to the cluster TLS profile are automatically propagated to components without operator restarts, enabling Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) readiness.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12425[SRVKP-12425]

//SRVKP-12425
Metrics migrated from OpenCensus to OpenTelemetry::

> Operator metrics have been migrated from OpenCensus to OpenTelemetry. The configuration key changed from `metrics.backend-destination` to `metrics-protocol` in the `tekton-config-observability` config map. Infrastructure metrics have been renamed from the `tekton_operator_lifecycle_` prefix to standard Knative and OpenTelemetry namespaces, for example, `tekton_operator_lifecycle_workqueue_depth` to `kn_workqueue_depth`. The following operator-specific metrics are removed: `tekton_operator_pipeline_reconcile_count`, `tekton_operator_trigger_reconcile_count`, `tekton_operator_chains_reconciled`, and `tekton_operator_results_reconciled`.

Reviewer 7: The removed metric names are missing the lifecycle_ segment. On a pre-migration version, the actual names are:

- tekton_operator_lifecycle_pipeline_reconcile_count
- tekton_operator_lifecycle_trigger_reconcile_count
- tekton_operator_lifecycle_chains_reconciled
- tekton_operator_lifecycle_results_reconciled

The doc lists them as tekton_operator_pipeline_reconcile_count, tekton_operator_trigger_reconcile_count, etc. — dropping lifecycle_.

+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-10579[SRVKP-10579]

//SRVKP-10610
Remote task resolution for Gitea and Forgejo::
{pac} supports resolving remote `taskRef` URLs when using Gitea or Forgejo as your Git provider. Previously, the provider silently ignored URL-based task references. You can reference tasks stored in any Gitea or Forgejo repository using standard web URLs, and {pac} fetches them using authenticated API calls. Supported URL formats include branch, tag, and commit SHA references. Both `/src/` and `/raw/` URL styles are accepted.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-10610[SRVKP-10610]

//SRVKP-10952
Consolidated GitHub App token and JWT creation helps improve reliability::
{pac} consolidates the GitHub App authentication flow by centralizing token and JWT creation logic. Previously, JWT generation logic was duplicated across multiple code paths, causing redundant Kubernetes API calls. The refactored implementation reduces API load and helps improve the reliability of GitHub App authentication.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-10952[SRVKP-10952]

//SRVKP-11121
Centralized pull request data fetching reduces GitHub API calls::

> {pac} caches GitHub pull request information within a single event lifecycle, eliminating redundant API calls. Previously, different components independently fetched the same pull request data from the GitHub API. The centralized approach fetches pull request metadata once and makes it available to all components. As a result, event processing is faster and API rate limit consumption is reduced.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
{pac} caches GitHub pull request information within a single event lifecycle, eliminating redundant API calls. Previously, different code section for different events independently fetched the same pull request data from the GitHub API. The centralized approach fetches pull request metadata once and makes it available to all sections. As a result, event processing is faster and API rate limit consumption is reduced.
```

+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-11121[SRVKP-11121]

//SRVKP-11568
Check run lookups cached to reduce duplicate GitHub API calls::

> {pac} caches GitHub check run status responses within a single event lifecycle. Previously, when processing multiple `PipelineRun` definitions in the `.tekton` directory, each goroutine made separate API calls, resulting in duplicate requests. The caching implementation makes the API call once and allows other goroutines to read from the cache. As a result, GitHub API rate limit consumption is significantly reduced when repositories contain multiple pipeline run definitions.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
{pac} now caches GitHub check run lookups during event processing. Previously, repositories with multiple PipelineRun definitions in the .tekton directory made redundant API calls to get the list of check runs, consuming rate limit unnecessarily. With this update, the check run list is fetched once and shared across all PipelineRuns in the same event. As a result, GitHub API rate limit usage is significantly reduced.
```
previous was seem to be having very low level info as it's release note.
cc: @theakshaypant

Author: Thank you, modified and updated.

+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-11568[SRVKP-11568]

//SRVKP-11061
Informer cache memory usage reduced by stripping unnecessary fields::

> {pac} informer caches use transform functions to strip unnecessary fields such as `ManagedFields`, `Annotations`, `Status`, and `Spec` from `Repository` and `PipelineRun` objects before caching. Previously, these fields were cached in full. The optimization helps reduce per-object memory consumption by 89-94%. All required data continues to be fetched directly from the API when needed.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
{pac} now strips large unused fields from cached objects in its informer caches, reducing per-object memory consumption by up to 94%. Previously, full Repository and PipelineRun objects were held in memory including fields only needed during active processing. With this update, only the metadata required for event matching is cached, and full object data is fetched from the API when needed.
```
cc: @theakshaypant

+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12421[SRVKP-12421]

//SRVKP-12421
Gitea provider caches changed files::
The Gitea provider caches changed files to reduce redundant API calls during pipeline runs, helping improve performance for repositories with frequent triggers.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12421[SRVKP-12421]

//SRVKP-12421
Informative message when /retest has nothing to retest::
When issuing `/retest` with no failed PipelineRuns to retry, {pac} responds with an informative message.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12421[SRVKP-12421]

.{tekton-chains}

//SRVKP-8542
Server-Side Apply helps improve finalizer management for resource cleanup::
{tekton-chains} uses Kubernetes Server-Side Apply to manage finalizers on `TaskRun` and `PipelineRun` resources. This helps improve the reliability and performance of resource cleanup by preventing conflicts when multiple controllers manage the same resources during deletion.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-8542[SRVKP-8542]

//SRVKP-12424
Metrics migrated from OpenCensus to OpenTelemetry::

> Metrics have been migrated from OpenCensus to OpenTelemetry for improved observability standards alignment and ecosystem compatibility.

Reviewer 7: This section says "Metrics have been migrated from OpenCensus to OpenTelemetry" but doesn't say what changed. From the source code, Chains signing metric names are actually unchanged — pre-migration raw name taskrun_sign_created_total + Knative component "watcher" → Prometheus name watcher_taskrun_sign_created_total. Post-migration has the same name. Worth noting that signing metric names didn't change, so users don't need to update Chains-specific dashboards — only infrastructure metrics (workqueue, K8s client, Go runtime) were renamed.

+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12424[SRVKP-12424]

.{tekton-results}

//SRVKP-12423
Loki logging plugin configuration options::
Two new Loki-specific configuration options are available for the logging plugin: `LOGGING_PLUGIN_JSON_MAP` to define custom JSON field extraction mappings, and `LOGGING_PLUGIN_LINE_FORMAT` to define custom log line output formatting. This allows extraction of structured fields from Loki log entries, such as timestamps and pipeline run UIDs, and control over how log lines are displayed when queried through {tekton-results}.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12423[SRVKP-12423]

.Triggers

//SRVKP-12419
TLS security profile support for core interceptors::
Core interceptors honor the TLS security profile injected by the Tekton Operator through `TLS_MIN_VERSION`, `TLS_CIPHER_SUITES`, and `TLS_CURVE_PREFERENCES` environment variables for cluster-wide TLS policy enforcement on {OCP}.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12419[SRVKP-12419]

//SRVKP-12419
Metrics migrated from OpenCensus to OpenTelemetry::

> Metrics have been migrated from OpenCensus to OpenTelemetry. The configuration key changed from `metrics.backend-destination` to `metrics-protocol` in the `config-observability-triggers` config map. Prometheus export remains the default. Infrastructure metrics have been renamed from the `tekton_triggers_controller_` prefix to standard Knative/OpenTelemetry namespaces, for example, `tekton_triggers_controller_workqueue_depth` to `kn_workqueue_depth`. Sink counter metrics have also been renamed, for example, `eventlistener_event_received_count` to `eventlistener_event_received_total`.

Reviewer 7: The old prefix is listed as tekton_triggers_controller_, but on a pre-migration version the actual metric names use the prefix controller_:

-   controller_workqueue_depth
-   controller_workqueue_adds_total
-   controller_client_latency_*
-   controller_go_alloc
-   controller_reconcile_count

So, the actual rename is controller_workqueue_depth → kn_workqueue_depth. A user grepping dashboards for tekton_triggers_controller_workqueue_depth won't find it.

Author: Thank you, updated.

+
[IMPORTANT]
====
If you customized observability settings, update the configuration key from `metrics.backend-destination` to `metrics-protocol` in your `config-observability-triggers` config map. Update any dashboards or alerts that reference the renamed metrics.
====
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12419[SRVKP-12419]

.Tasks

//SRVKP-10806
Maven Task supports Java version selection::
The Maven Task includes a new `JAVA_VERSION` parameter to select the Java version for Maven builds. Supported values are `8`, `11`, `17`, and `21`. Previously, the Java version was hard-coded to OpenJDK 11. This was a regression from the ClusterTask-to-Task migration in {pipelines-shortname} 1.17. The default value remains `11` for backward compatibility.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-10806[SRVKP-10806]

.User interface

> //SRVKP-9273

Reviewer 9: PatternFly 6 and React 18 migration is already released in OSP 1.22.2

Can you please remove this and add below note in an info section for OSP UI

```
OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) 4.22 introduces breaking platform changes that affect the compatibility of the OpenShift Pipelines user interface (OSP UI). 
As a result, the latest OSP UI features are only available on OCP 4.22 and later. 
Customers running OCP 4.21 and earlier are advised to review the supported upgrade paths and plan upgrades accordingly to take advantage of these UI improvements.
```

cc: @anwesha-palit-redhat

Reviewer 10: yes this is required

| `CONFIG_OBSERVABILITY_NAME` ConfigMap reference
|===
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
If you customized observability settings, you must update the configuration key from `metrics.backend-destination` to `metrics-protocol` in your `tekton-config-observability`, `config-observability`, `config-observability-triggers`, or `tekton-results-config-observability` config maps. For {pac}, you must migrate from the `K_METRICS_CONFIG` environment variable to the `pipelines-as-code-config-observability` config map. Update any dashboards or alerts that reference the renamed or removed metrics.
====
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-7899[SRVKP-7899]

.Pipelines

//SRVKP-10955
Hub Resolver supports multiple Artifact Hub URLs::
The Hub Resolver supports multiple Artifact Hub URLs at the cluster level with ordered fallback behavior. Previously, only a single URL could be configured cluster-wide. Multiple hub URLs can be configured at the cluster level, or a hub URL can be specified per resolution request using the `url` parameter. When no parameter is provided, the resolver falls back to cluster defaults.
+
link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-10955[SRVKP-10955]

> //SRVKP-12422

Reviewer 5: @ochromy  None of the items in release notes should point to epic [SRVKP-12422](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SRVKP-12422), please get the relevant jira id's for these items from Dev

Author: Based on the discussion in https://redhat-internal.slack.com/archives/CG5GV6CJD/p1778671822792699, removed links for upstream features.
